Migrations
==========

Since version 0.1.10 clickhouse-sqlalchemy has alembic support. This support
allows autogenerate migrations from source code with some limitations.
This is the main advantage comparing to other migration tools when you need to
write plain migrations by yourself.

.. note::

    It is necessary to notice that ClickHouse doesn't have transactions.
    Therefore migration will not rolled back after some command with an error.
    And schema will remain in partially migrated state.

Autogenerate **will detect**:

* Table and materialized view additions, removals.
* Column additions, removals.
* Column and table comment additions, removals.
* Column type changes when Alembic's ``compare_type`` option is enabled.

Example project with migrations https://github.com/xzkostyan/clickhouse-sqlalchemy-alembic-example.

Requirements
------------

Minimal versions:

* ClickHouse server 21.11.11.1
* clickhouse-sqlalchemy 0.1.10
* alembic 1.5 or newer

You can always write you migrations with pure alembic's ``op.execute`` if
autogenerate is not possible for your schema objects or your are using
``clickhouse-sqlalchemy<0.1.10``.

Create table autogenerate
-------------------------

Autogenerated ``op.create_table`` calls include ClickHouse-specific column
types, table engines, and table options such as ``clickhouse_cluster``.

For example, the following table definition:

    .. code-block:: python

        from sqlalchemy import Column, MetaData

        from clickhouse_sqlalchemy import Table, engines, types

        metadata = MetaData()

        events = Table(
            'events',
            metadata,
            Column('id', types.UInt64, nullable=False),
            Column('created_at', types.DateTime64(3), nullable=False),
            Column('payload', types.Nullable(types.String)),
            engines.MergeTree(order_by='id'),
            clickhouse_cluster='cluster1'
        )

can be rendered as:

    .. code-block:: python

        op.create_table(
            'events',
            sa.Column('id', clickhouse_sqlalchemy.types.UInt64(), nullable=False),
            sa.Column('created_at', clickhouse_sqlalchemy.types.DateTime64(3), nullable=False),
            sa.Column('payload', clickhouse_sqlalchemy.types.Nullable(clickhouse_sqlalchemy.types.String()), nullable=True),
            clickhouse_sqlalchemy.engines.MergeTree(order_by='id'),
            clickhouse_cluster='cluster1'
        )

The renderer uses the public ``clickhouse_sqlalchemy.types`` and
``clickhouse_sqlalchemy.engines`` namespaces so generated migrations are stable
across internal module layout changes.

Supported autogenerate rendering includes:

* ClickHouse scalar types such as ``UInt64``, ``DateTime64``, ``Decimal*``,
  ``Enum*``, ``IPv4`` and ``IPv6``.
* Composite types such as ``Array``, ``Nullable``, ``LowCardinality``,
  ``Tuple``, ``Map``, ``Nested``, ``AggregateFunction`` and
  ``SimpleAggregateFunction``.
* Engines such as ``Memory``, ``Log``, ``TinyLog``, ``MergeTree`` family
  engines, ``Replicated*MergeTree`` engines, ``Distributed`` and ``Buffer``.
* Column options such as ``clickhouse_materialized``, ``clickhouse_alias``,
  ``clickhouse_codec`` and ``clickhouse_after``.
* Table options such as ``schema``, ``comment``, ``info``, ``if_not_exists``
  and ``clickhouse_cluster``.

Limitations
-----------

Common limitations:

* ``Nullable(T)`` columns generation via ``Column(..., nullable=True)`` is not
  supported.
* Some advanced ClickHouse features may still need manual adjustment after
  autogeneration. Generated migrations should always be reviewed before being
  applied.

Currently ``ATTACH MATERIALIZED VIEW`` with modified ``SELECT`` statement
doesn't work for ``Atomic`` engine.

Migration adjusting
-------------------

You can and should adjust migrations after autogeneration.

Following parameters can be specified for:

* ``op.detach_mat_view``: ``if_exists``, ``on_cluster``, ``permanently``.
* ``op.attach_mat_view``: ``if_not_exists``, ``on_cluster``.
* ``op.create_mat_view``: ``if_not_exists``, ``on_cluster``, ``populate``.

See ClickHouse's Materialized View documentation.

For ``op.add_column`` you can add:

* ``AFTER name_after``: ``op.add_column(..., sa.Column(..., clickhouse_after=sa.text('my_column')))``.
